Senator Hatfield, do you give your permission to
allow this to be used as quotable material for a
research paper? I, Mark Hatfield, do. Thank you
very much. As you know, this interview will focus
on the Vietnam War and particularly your role in
the Vietnam War protest movement. And
specifically,
What instances caused you, as early as the 1965
Governor's Convention, to come out publicly and
state your opposition to the war?
Well, I had expressed my reservations in
opposition to the war to a goodly number of people
privately. And in 1965, And I'd made a few speeches
around the state, the question-answer period, or
I would make some comment about my disbelief that
we had a national interest, a national interest
that justified getting involved in war in
Southeast Asia. I had seen it purely as a failure of
the French to reestablish its colonial domain and
that we were in effect picking up the marbles where
the French failed and were finally driven out
following the battle of Dien Bien Phu. So I had a
background there of having been in Vietnam while
we were allies with Ho Chi Minh against the
Japanese in World War II. But the governor's
conference that was held that year in Minneapolis
A number of the Johnson supporters, President
Lyndon Johnson supporters, Democrats, were very
anxious to use the governor's conference to
affirm the president's war policy. He had gone
before the FLCIO and gotten a resolution. passed
affirming his war policy. He had obtained some
similar business group resolutions. He was
looking, reaching out to get as many various
groups as he could to go on record passing a formal
resolution to support the war policy. He liked to
wave those in his public speeches to indicate that
he had the support of Americans and that radicals,
the anti-war protesters, were but a very small,
vocal, radical minority. So when the governors
met in their annual conference in Minneapolis, a
group of his supporters offered a resolution to
endorse President Johnson's war policy. It was
not debated at any length. They tried to ram it
through. I attempted to ask some questions about
the scope and why we were doing this, but it
nevertheless was ramrodded through. And at the
time the vote was taken, it was a voice vote. And I
made my voice heard. by voting no. As I recall, they
didn't even ask for the no's. It was just sort of all
those in favor say aye, and I remember that I had to
make my voice loud in order to register my no vote.
Well, the meeting adjourned immediately, and we
went out into the lobby and
The press was asking for my explanation of my vote
when Governor George Romney of Michigan came up
and said, well, I voted no, too. And so I remember
Governor Conley coming by, who was then governor
of Texas, and interrupted my press conference by
shaking his finger in my face and saying, you have
done a disservice to your country. And it was
obviously not a popular vote, although I did have
some colleagues who said, well, I wish we didn't
have that vote.
I respect your negative vote. If I did that, my
constituents would eat me alive. And so that was
how I got into it. Then, of course, it made a news
item. Well, President Johnson then sent Air Force
his Air Force plane up to Minneapolis to bring us
all down to Washington so that we could be briefed.
And as he had us briefed in the White House, George
Romney got up and said, well, Mr. President, your
briefing has convinced me that you're right. And
so he said, I now support your policy. I didn't say
anything at the time. And as a meeting then sort of
adjourned, President Johnson came over to me and
asked me how I felt now. And I said, well, I still
oppose the war. I had not changed my mind. I heard
nothing that I had not read or heard about before as
justification for the war, and I still disagree.
And at that time, he expressed some surprise when I
When he next asked me if I will, do you want to go out
and see the press then? And I said, no, I have no
desire to see the press. I registered my vote down
at the governor's conference. And I have no desire
to see the press. I'd like to avoid the press. And he
looked at me and he said, well, you really believe
it then, don't you? And I said, of course I do. Very
strong convictions on this. So he had one of his
staff people let me out the side door and I escaped
the press. That was sort of the events as I recall
them at this time. Okay, I guess that actually
brings up two questions. One, I read in your book
that You felt that Lyndon Johnson was able to make
the war, minimalize the war protest by making it
look like the administration versus the hippies
and sort of left out all the dissent that was being
felt in the country in the middle class and as well
as the Senators. How was he able to do that? Well,
you have to remember the President of the United
States has tremendous ability to manipulate news
in which he has been the chief architect. After
all, he can call up a news person or he could call a
news conference and the whole nation listens to
what the president says. A governor of a western
state does not command that kind of news coverage
and therefore he has the ability to override and
more or less mold the news as he wants. As they say,
put a spin on the news. You have over 500 members of
the Congress and here again, 500 members or even
two or three that were dissenters at that time,
only two in the Senate. They don't command that
kind of news attention. So the president really
has a tremendous advantage. He's one person
speaking for one branch of government. And
obviously, as contrasted to over 500 members
speaking for the legislative branch of
government, he has an advantage. And he wanted to
portray the war protesters in a stereotype with
the Jane Fondas and the hippies, the radicals who
were burning down the ROTC buildings on
university campuses. those who were setting
firebombs in the streets. You know, there's
nothing that set our effort back more than the
radicals who the hypocrisy of using violence to
protest violence came through to the American
people very clearly. American people don't have
much time for those who are talking about war and
their attitude toward war and then using in effect
violence to express themselves to exercise their
freedom of speech they weren't helping the cause i
can assure you And as a consequence, he exploited
that. Johnson had, you know, the cameras and the
news media loved the action of something that was
exploding in the streets or something that was
burning a building down, burning the flag and all
of those things that the extremists were doing. It
was played on the tube every night, or at least very
frequently. And then you had the... American
soldiers fighting, you know, and dying for, under
their government command, government policy.
And the contrast was very, very great. And I can
assure you, as one of those protesters within the
establishment, within the government as I was, it
made our task very, very difficult to separate
ourselves and to have a responsible protest, a
legitimate protest, as against the kind of
radical extremists that were out there on the
streets.
Were there any groups, protest groups, actually,
such as Students for a Democratic Society or Women
for Peace, that you attempted in any way to
correspond with and to work towards a positive
goal, or did you try to remove yourselves
completely from those kind of organizations?
Well, initially, when I was governor, it was
difficult to maintain national contact. I had a
lot of mail. I had telephone calls, and I had organ
groups that were protesters with whom I met very
regularly. trying to work out some kind of a
rallying point of responsible protest. It was not
until I got to the Senate, which was in 1966
election, that I found that there were a number of
senators by now in 1967. It would have been by
January. I was elected in 66 and sworn in in
January. I found that it had expanded beyond just
Wayne Morse and Dr. Greening of Alaska, who had
cast the only two votes against the Gulf of Tonkin
resolution. By this time, Senator Fulbright of
Arkansas, who was the chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, was expressing his
dissent, and a few other senators. But the
difficulty was what in the world did you rally?
What was the focus of dissent other than just
speech-making or this violence and such out on the
countryside? So Senator McGovern and I decided
that what we ought to do would be to offer a
resolution to cut off the funds prospectively. So
we weren't going to cut off the equipment flowing
to our soldiers out there on the battlefront, deny
them the opportunity to defend themselves. But we
were making a prospecting that we would, this
resolution called for the cutoff of any funds to
conduct war as of a certain prospective date. And
this became then the battle cry, the so-called
Hatfield-McGovern Amendment. We had a
professional come down from New York. I wish I
could remember his name. It's probably in the
book. And we took some television time
underwritten by some of the businessmen who were
against the war. And on that television, Frank
Church, a Democrat from Idaho, and Harold Hughes,
Democrat from Iowa, George McGovern, Charlie
Goodell, Republican from New York State, and
myself, as I recall. Was there one more? No, I think
that was it. We went on a television prime time and
appealed to the American public to support our
resolution and to send us contributions. in order
to advertise and to communicate and disperse this
resolution and create it as a rallying point. The
Methodist Center up on the hill became the place
that these letters came in, and they came in by the
thousands. We were overwhelmed. We could never
believe that the dollar bill, $5, the $20, that
people all over this country sent to be helpful in
our effort. Now, that became the first rallying
point of an action that we took from within the
institution. We only had seven co-sponsors, as I
recall, a handful. And we reintroduced it, and
that became then the focus of protest and it got up
to 48 votes out of 100 senators and Mr. Nixon by this
time had been elected and began to read the signals
and that's when he began his plans for withdrawal.
Speaking of Nixon, what Actually, the McGovern
race is more what I'm interested in. If there was so
much anti-war feeling by the time the 72 election
rolled around, why was McGovern able to only pull
the very limited number of votes that he did in that
election? Did you see any particular reason?
Pardon? Any particular reason for that? There
were a number of reasons. First of all, by 72, there
were fairly clear signals the administration was
moving to find an exit from the war. In 68, Mr. Nixon
had a secret plan. He said he wasn't going to talk
about the war the rest of the time of the election
campaign in 68. And that was against Mr. Humphrey,
who was, of course, Mr. Johnson's vice president
and was one of the architects of the whole war
policy. By 72, the
whole effort in the Congress had focused more
clearly. And I think there were a lot of peripheral
issues. Mr. McGovern. unfortunately, had a
horrible time trying to find a vice presidential
running mate. And he didn't have any idea. And
every day at the convention, Senator Abraham
Ribicoff turns McGovern down. Senator so-and-so
turns him down. He names Senator Eagleton. And
then it comes out Senator Eagleton had had shock
treatment for nervous breakdown. So he went off
the ticket. And then he finally got Sergeant
Shriver, Senator Kennedy's brother-in-law, to
come on the ticket. Well, by this time, the public
perceived that McGovern couldn't even put a
ticket together. How was he going to run the
country? So there were a lot of really peripheral
issues like that, not directly relating to the
war, that caused the public to lose confidence
that McGovern was equipped or capable of
governing. or becoming president.
Is there any particular action, if you had been
able to take the war protesters, I know you say that
they were doing things that were actually harmful
to the movement itself, if you could have focused
them in any one direction, in their public protest
or whatever, what direction would you have headed
them? What would you have had all these people,
aside from supporting what y'all were trying to do
in the Senate, what would you have them do in
mainstream Americana, I guess? Well, bear in
mind, all during this time, I was traveling the
college campuses, Berkeley, Harvard, Stanford,
all over the country, your major large
universities as well as some of your smaller ones.
And I had one simple theme, and that is that the
focus was on Washington, DC. Everybody was trying
to get to Washington, to have a demonstration in
Washington. And my theme was, Washington is but a
reflection of every main street in America. And
they were missing the bet of not visiting the
editors of their local papers, the leaders of
their business community who were part of the
National Chamber of Commerce, part of the
National Association of Manufacturers, part of
the AFL-CIO, who were passing these resolutions
of support at the national level. And I said,
they're but reflecting the feelings amongst
their constituents out in these various
communities. You don't have to come to Washington
to have a protest. You don't have to come to
Washington trying to persuade the change of
policy. The policy in Washington is but a
reflection of the attitudes and the viewpoints of
the people living right in your own neighborhood,
right in your own community. And that's where you
should be putting your constructive persuasive
protest. OK. Do you feel then because maybe they
didn't put enough pressure on their local
officials or even on their state and national
elected officials, I sort of got the feeling from
in general reading some of your book that people
here in Washington were trying to protect their
political futures and not doing what was best for
America. Did you get that feeling? Well, I know
that a lot of the members of Congress were not
publicly expressing the same opinion that they
were privately expressing in the cloakrooms and
elsewhere, because they felt the public
sentiment was behind the war. And at certain
periods of this time, it certainly was behind the
war. I believe it was tested out in Oregon that in
1966, when I was running for the Senate, that about
76% of the public did support the war. So these were
great, overwhelming statistics that influenced
an awful lot of people in public life who were
dependent on that same constituency for their
votes.
In your book, you mentioned that you felt At as
early as, well I guess Lyndon Johnson has stated
that as early as 1964 he had plans for actually
sending more troops in when publicly during his
campaign he was saying he was not going to escalate
the war. Do you feel that disinformation campaign
contributed to the hotbed of protest or was it an
attempt of his to actually combat the protest? I
would have to speculate because I didn't have that
kind of close relationship to know what Johnson
was saying to his close advisors and what to
contrast it with what he was saying publicly. But I
do feel that the fact that later Mr. Nixon expanded
the war after his 68 election where he said he had a
secret plan to bring the war to an end, that he
wasn't going to debate or discuss or announce in
public until after he was elected. By the way, I
wrote him a letter at that time and said that I had
been named one of his surrogate candidates to
campaign for him and authorized to speak on any
issue on his behalf. And I said, I will have to, in
effect, cease my involvement until you're
willing to head on, take head on, the most
fundamental, important issue of this campaign. I
said, I just don't think people are going to buy a
pig and a poke that you have some secret plan. Well,
remember, after he was elected, he increased and
expanded the war into Cambodia by starting the
bombing of Cambodia, because he said there was a
great communist cache of arms in Cambodia that
were being used to against our fighting forces in
Vietnam. Well, later they never did find the cache
of arms that we talked about. And so when I used
Nixon's action to expand the war into Cambodia, it
would certainly then follow that, or it could
follow that Johnson may have had ideas that were
being sold to him about expanding the number of
troops to bring the war to a quicker end. They kept
talking about a light at the end of the tunnel. That
was Secretary of Defense McNamara, Robert
McNamara, phrased it, well, we see a light at the
end of the tunnel. Well, that was when we had
200,000 there. And when Johnson left office, it
had escalated to 563,000. We were still seeing the
light at the end of the tunnel as we escalated. So it
would have followed in the pattern of Johnson's
policy. I'll take you home. Johnson... Yes, sir.
Johnson, in his administration, escalated the
war. Remember, Kennedy sent the first... When
Kennedy became president, there were only 600
advisers that were left there by Eisenhower. And
Eisenhower had resisted sending combat troops.
And at that time, John Foster Dulles, his
secretary of state, and later Christian Herder,
and as well as Vice President Nixon were urging
Eisenhower to send combat troops. And he refused.
So when Kennedy then became president, he really,
you might say, started the actual war, as far as the
United States is concerned, by sending 17,000
combat troops
there. And then when Johnson came in, But in that
period of Johnson's administration, it was a
consistent pattern of escalating, always that
McNamara and the generals were saying, another
10,000, another 20,000, and we can bring the war to
a quicker end. And it finally got up to 500, and as I
recall, 43,000 or 63,000, in excess of 500,000. So
it could well have fallen in that pattern.
Do you... You've stated in the book as well as in
other places that you feel under no circumstances
should you break the law to try and make a point. You
state in the book you do not agree with civil
disobedience. What were your personal feelings?
Let me clarify that a little bit. I do think there's
a right of civil disobedience provided you don't
use force and violence. and provided that you
stand accountable for your action of civil
disobedience. The idea of committing an act of
civil disobedience and running, I did not agree
with. But I think the right of conscience gives to
any American the right to disobey the law,
provided it is a nonviolent, action and that one
then stands ready to suffer the penalty of that
disobedience.
So on the I mean a certain situation such as burning
a draft card refusing to if drafted to go into
service if they were willing to accept the penalty
of their spending the time in jail but not running
off to camp. That's right.